\documentclass[12pt]{article}
\usepackage[margin=1in]{geometry}
\usepackage{graphicx}
\usepackage{setspace}
\usepackage{url}

\title{Tecellate: A Distributed Environment for Ad Hoc Wireless Network Simulations}
\author{
        Steve Johnson (srj15@case.edu)\\
        Case Western Reserve University\\
        \and Tim Henderson (tah35@case.edu)\\
        Case Western Reserve University
}
\date{\today}

\begin{document}
\doublespacing
\maketitle

% \begin{multicols}{2}

\begin{abstract}
    Tecellate is a simulation which autonomous agents can move in a grid and communicate using
    semi-realistic radio signals. The simulation itself can be distributed over multiple machines to
    allow for very large simulations. The system allows researchers to test various wireless network
    protocols and algorithms under arbitrarily harsh conditions.
    
     The usefulness of the simulation was tested using an approximated IP stack. Our initial results
    show that the simulation produces useful information, though more work is required to improve
    its accuracy.
\end{abstract}

\section{Introduction}

Network simulations have become important tools for researching mobile networks. Most research
groups do not have the ability to purchase and use thousands of mobile devices for research and have
thus turned to simulation. However, as many previous simulation authors have noted, simulations will
always sacrifice some element of realism. We have decided to take a novel approach to these
sacrifices, introducing a new way to test wireless mobile networks.

Tecellate simulates the physical layer of the network. All \textbf{agents} (actors in the
simulation) have a ``radio'' that sends and receives byte strings. These byte strings may be
corrupted, so agents must ensure that their link level connectivity is accurate. The simulation
includes complications like interference from other sources and exponential drop-off of power as
agents move away from the source of a transmission.

In the physical world, devices move around with purpose and transmit with purpose. We assert that
the same should be true in a simulation. However, modeling the purpose of actual people is not
feasible. Instead, we propose to give the agents an alternative purpose: to stay alive. Each agent
has to ``eat'' to survive. Each turn, it may eat a unit of food if its current location contains
food. If it runs out of energy, it dies. The goal of the agents is to stay alive as long as
possible. Thus, it must find sources of food within the simulation. This game-like element provides
the agents with goals and a purpose for communication.

As wireless networks become more widespread, the number of participants in a given network will
grow. Simulations that are not scalable may become too slow to simulate important test cases. For
this reason, Tecellate is designed to scale neatly across many machines.

By modeling the communication at the physical layer and adding game-like elements to our simulation,
we hope to provide an interesting test bed for networking and AI algorithms. The game-like element
in our simulation will help ensure the agents move around purposefully in the simulation grid. The
physical layer simulation ensures that the communication problems which must be overcome for
reliable communication are similar to real world problems. The inherent scalability of the system
should allow simulation of arbitrarily large scenarios. While, we do not think our simulation
approach would be the final word in networks simulation, it should provide a useful platform for
experimentation.

\input{litsurvey}

\input{world}

\input{current}

\input{distributed}

\input{validation}

\input{conclusion}

\nocite{*}
\bibliographystyle{acm}
\bibliography{bibliography}

\end{document}
